Revamped TF vs. Pulumi IaC page (#14817)
pulumi/docs: content/docs/iac/concepts/vs/terraform/_index.md

---
title_tag: "Terraform vs. Pulumi IaC"

> meta_desc: Pulumi IaC and Terraform have a few similarities, but they differ in many key ways. This page helps provide a rundown of these major differences.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
meta_desc: Pulumi IaC and Terraform have many similarities, and yet they differ in many key ways. This page helps provide a rundown of the Pulumi's advantages.
```

    }
</style>

{{< youtube "v2XMEZ_LeCY?rel=0" >}}

> ## Infrastructure Mangement as Powerful as Your Applications

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Infrastructure Management as Powerful as Your Applications
```

Pulumi IaC lets you write infrastructure as code in any programming language and deploy to any cloud. Terraform requires learning HCL, a DSL that optimizes for simplicity at the expense of flexibility and scale. Instead, Pulumi IaC integrates into the existing coding tools and workflows you already know while also providing performance, scalability, ease of use and more.

With Pulumi IaC, you can:

- Write infrastructure code in languages like Python, TypeScript, Java, .NET, Go, and more
- Get full IDE support with code completion and error checking
- Use your language's entire ecosystem of libraries and tools to create custom resources or reusable infrastructure components
- Invoke execution via CLI, APIs, or embed infrastructure management in your applications

## At a Glance

🔧 **Terraform**

> - ❌ Proprietary domain specific language (HCL)

Reviewer 2: Feedback from Eric: let's not use ANY EMOJIS in our content

Reviewer 2: What's a better way of communicating this?

Author: Gotcha. Emojis were in the variant page, so I pulled them into this one. Happy to get rid of them if that's our standard. Perhaps that should be in the style guide?

Reviewer 2: Good call; here's the PR for the style guide: https://github.com/pulumi/docs/pull/14833

- **.NET**: Integrate with existing enterprise .NET ecosystems
- **YAML**: Available for teams preferring simpler configurations

> The freedom and benefits gained when using true programming languages is a large fundamental difference with a wealth of additional impacts. For now, let's consider a condensed list of other real world scenarios where differences present themselves.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The freedom and benefits gained when using true programming languages are large fundamental differences with a wealth of additional impacts. For now, let's consider a condensed list of other real world scenarios where differences present themselves.
```

### Workflow and Developer Experience

- Full IDE support with code completion and error detection
- Pulumi provided test framework (unit, property, and integration tests)
- Support for other popular testing frameworks
- Create new custom resources by directly coding CRUD operations in Dynamic Providers
- Transformations allow you to apply consistent settings across your infrastructure without having to manipulate individual resources

### Cloud Native Power

- Kubernetes provider with 100% K8s API coverage and type checking
- Native support for Helm 2 and Helm 3
- Built-in conversion for YAML to Pulumi IaC code in your desired language
- Pulumi Kubernetes operator for GitOps workflows

### Enterprise-Ready

- Reusable & modular infrastructure components for governance in your Internal Developer Portal
- Compliance via Audit logs to track things like user activity
- Encrypted secrets in transit and rest (by default)

> - Policy as Code enforce best practices in your desired programming language

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Policy as Code enforces best practices in your desired programming language
```

### Migration and Integration

Pulumi IaC’s extensibility also enables cross functionality with Terraform

- Built-in converters to migrate Terraform HCL code to Pulumi IaC
- Reference existing Terraform state with Pulumi IaC
- Enterprise support for Bundled Terraform workspace migrations
- Pulumi support for migration services and training

## Feature by Feature Comparison

> The high level consideration of product design and real world use cases is illustrative for big picture context. A closer examination of individual features can also draw out key fundamental differences and similarities.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The high level consideration of product design and real world use cases are illustrative for big picture context. A closer examination of individual features can also draw out key fundamental differences and similarities.
```

### IDE Support {#ide}

Terraform has plugins for some IDEs. However, the features are varied and limited. With Pulumi IaC, you can tap into decades of innovation and refinement with any IDE. The IDEs automatically provide code completion, strong typing, error squiggles, rich resource documentation, and more.

### Testing and Validation {#testing}

> Terraform supports integration testing. With Pulumi IaC, you can take advantage of  native testing frameworks and perform automated tests of your infrastructure because Pulumi IaC uses general purpose programming languages to provision cloud resources. Pulumi provides unit tests (fast in-memory tests that mock all external calls), property tests (run resource-level assertions while infrastructure is being deployed), and integration tests (deploy ephemeral infrastructure and run external tests against it). For more information on how to run tests with Pulumi IaC, see [Testing](/docs/using-pulumi/testing/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Terraform supports integration testing. With Pulumi IaC, you can take advantage of native testing frameworks and perform automated tests of your infrastructure because Pulumi IaC uses general purpose programming languages to provision cloud resources. Pulumi provides unit tests (fast in-memory tests that mock all external calls), property tests (run resource-level assertions while infrastructure is being deployed), and integration tests (deploy ephemeral infrastructure and run external tests against it). For more information on how to run tests with Pulumi IaC, see [Testing](/docs/using-pulumi/testing/).
```

### Import Code from Other IaC Tools {#converting}

Pulumi IaC allows you to convert templates by Terraform HCL, Kubernetes YAML, and Azure ARM into Pulumi programs. This preserves the existing program structure, which may be important if you carefully designed your existing infrastructure as code layout in terms of names, modules, and configurability. Conversion takes care of the static program structure and will automatically generate a new, fully-functional Pulumi program that matches the source infrastructure as code program. To learn more, see  [Conversion](/docs/using-pulumi/adopting-pulumi/migrating-to-pulumi/#conversion) in our Adopting Pulumi IaC user guide.

### Adopt Existing Resources {#adopting}

Both Pulumi IaC and Terraform support importing existing resources so that they can be managed by each. Pulumi IaC also allows you to generate code in your language of choice from the existing state. Terraform only supports importing state but requires you to hand-author the HCL. To learn more, see [Importing Infrastructure](/docs/using-pulumi/adopting-pulumi/import/) in our Adopting Pulumi IaC user guide.

> ### Aliases

Reviewer 2: should this have a header id like others?

Author: good catch. will include. thanks!

By default, Terraform requires that you manage concurrency and state manually, by way of its “state files.” Pulumi IaC, in contrast, uses the free [Pulumi Cloud](https://app.pulumi.com/) to eliminate these concerns. This makes getting started with Pulumi IaC, and operationalizing it in a team setting, much easier. For advanced use cases, it is possible to [use Pulumi IaC without the Pulumi Cloud](/docs/support/faq#can-i-use-pulumi-without-depending-on-the-/pulumi-cloud/), which works a lot more like Terraform, but requires you to manage state and concurrency issues. Pulumi IaC errs on the side of ease-of-use.

For more information on how Pulumi IaC manages state or how to use different backends, see [State and Backends](/docs/concepts/state/).

#### Using Terraform Providers {#providers-terraform}

Pulumi IaC is able to adapt [any Terraform Provider](https://github.com/terraform-providers) for use, enabling management of any infrastructure supported by the Terraform Providers ecosystem using Pulumi IaC programs.

> Indeed, some of Pulumi IaC’s most interesting providers have been created this way, delivering access to robust, tried-and-true infrastructure management. The Terraform Providers ecosystem is mature and healthy, and enjoys contributions from many cloud and infrastructure leaders across the industry, ourselves included.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some of Pulumi IaC’s most interesting providers have been created this way, delivering access to robust, tried-and-true infrastructure management. The Terraform Providers ecosystem is mature and healthy, and enjoys contributions from many cloud and infrastructure leaders across the industry, ourselves included.
```

> Most Pulumi IaC users don’t need to know about this detail, however we are proud to be building on the work of others, and contributing our own open source back to this vibrant ecosystem, and thought you should know.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We are proud to be building on the work of others, and contributing our own open source back to this vibrant ecosystem.
```

In the event you’d like to add new providers, or understand how this integration works, check out the
 [Pulumi Terraform bridge repo](https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi-terraform-bridge). This bridge is fully open source and makes it easy to create new Pulumi IaC providers out of existing Terraform Providers.

#### Converting From Terraform to Pulumi IaC {#providers-converting}

The Pulumi CLI can be used to convert Terraform HCL to Pulumi IaC via `pulumi convert --from terraform`. To learn more, see [Converting Terraform HCL to Pulumi IaC](/docs/using-pulumi/adopting-pulumi/migrating-to-pulumi/from-terraform/#converting-terraform-hcl-to-pulumi) in our Adopting Pulumi IaC user guide.

> For an example of how to do a Terraform-to-Pulumi conversion, see our article, [Converting Full Terraform Programs to Pulumi](/blog/converting-full-terraform-programs-to-pulumi/).

Reviewer 2: I never like the use of "our" in informational content, especially when "your" is prevalent; creates a divide between "ours" vs "theirs".

Reviewer 2: I guess it makes sense contextually to distinguish from Terraform.

Author: Fair enough, it can be the non-possesive "the" article. Or simply cut that and link to content. IOW, "For an example... see [Converting Full ...]" I'll update to that

Author: The new version removes most possessives, except where grammatically necessary.
